Settle down. Sit down. Come sit down.
And uh I'd like you to begin by
closing your eyes, just listening
closely
and imagining a plane of light at the
top of your head.
And feel
feel as this plane of light passes down
the tip of your scalp
down your forehead.
Notice it rolling over the bridge of
your nose.
Visualizing this plane of light making
its way past your throat
down to your shoulders.
down to your arms.
Aware of your breathing as your chest
fills and releases with air.
Noticing your diaphragm.
Scanning your whole body down further.
Slowly feeling the weight of your body
on the chair.
the points of contact between your
clothes and your skin, your feet.
Can you feel it?
Can you notice the temperature around
you?
And can you sense
the new found fascination with the body
that permeates the airspace?
Open.
The spirit of Ombberto Bchioni is alive
and well in America.
After all, it was American industry and
American modernity which inspired the
Italian futurists to refashion classical
man into something dynamic, fluid,
mechanical, technological.
Now we Americans are at it again.
Ancestral diets, [__] cultures,
diagnostic identities, health protocols,
biio medicine, biomemeasurement,
surrogacy, and trauma discourse are all
facets of the body's increasing role in
social thought.
The new body futurism takes over from
the now tired futurism of software, but
it's made of the same materials mined
from the California coast.
Body futurism is the result of a
republic turning its mind inward of
opponents of cartisianism seizing the
day in the academy of technologists
moving their attention from virtual
spaces to physical places. In other
words, body futurism is overdetermined.
So settle in.
Futurist artworks like speed of a
motorcycle transformed automobiles and
industrial machinery into dynamic
sculptural forms with amplified speed,
power, and scale.
Today's technologists do the same when
they base social utopian imaginaries on
machinic concepts. The utopian fantasies
of the last 30 years have been shaped
profoundly by software.
The cipher punk and crypto anarchist
movements of the 90s laid out
cryptography based visions of the
future. Digital nations without states,
anonymous peer-to-peer exchange,
effortless information flow. Then the
2000s saw the rise of social media
hailed as a technology that would enable
the spread of open societies. And in the
2010s, cryptocurrencies launched a new
wave of crypto idealism, pumping
narratives of global coordination,
private money, and a world computer
poised to disintermediate legacy
institutions.
In all these variations, the software
utopia is one accessed through a screen.
Even network states, online communities
with an aspiration to manifest
physically begin with virtual
collectivity.
But over the last few years, these
disembodied cloud utopias have begun to
evaporate. Software has eaten the world,
and there's nothing left to consume. It
has not delivered on its fantastical
premises, turning formerly brighteyed
millennials into technopes doomers. In
the wake of the tech lash, what remains
of the software futurists have
consolidated around effective
acceleration. Only the promise of an AI
god holds out hope for software
utopians. And the shest sign of software
exhaustion is that tech positivism is in
the process of escaping itself into a
variety of other domains. You no longer
need to work in tech to hold the
cultural positions of tech workers. Now
there are life scientists, housing
lobbyists, wararmongers, and energy
policy advocates who all take a
technoprogressive stance. But very few
grasp the most vital point of this
moment.
The futurist tendencies of recent
decades made no room for the physical
person. But with the fall of software
comes the return of the repressed, the
body itself.
The higher ideals of crypto and social
media have failed, but they left behind
an economic reality. The mainstreaming
of gambling and cretailed career
mobility have combined to form an
economic environment characterized by
grift. Attention is all you need. The
name of the white paper that inaugurated
the current era of large language models
is a perfect catchphrase for the
transition to this pure attention
economy where bodies matter most. AI
researchers in this city are all taking
GLP1s and starting bodybuilding
routines, having convinced each other
that physique will be the final
competitive edge after AI takes all the
white collar jobs. The conclusion is
excessive, but the premises are correct.
We've already entered an economy of
charisma which grants status to various
kinds of extreme physicality or prowess.
Now charisma has long been the dominant
mode in social media. But now
athleticism is rewarded more than ever.
Jake and Logan Paul pivoted from
YouTuber to boxing. I show speed does
exhibition races. Less and less
influencers are talking heads. More and
more it is the bodies doing the talking.
Builders have become bodybuilders. Gray
market peptides and gene therapies have
replaced Soilent. The muscle tea and
chain has replaced Zuck's famous hoodie.
And the office cold plunge has replaced
the office beanag couch. Grinders and
quantified self were once fringe Silicon
Valley subcultures. These movements have
now been mainstreamed and productized by
Whoop bands, Apple watches, and eight
sleep mattresses. Meanwhile, the
rhetoric of body augmentation has become
far more radical. Longevity,
immortality, advanced meditative states,
direct nosis, enhanced Olympics, and
super intelligent babies are the new
superme complexes. The human body itself
is the new site of utopian social
visions.
The platform is different, but the style
of utopian extrapolation is the same.
Body imaginaries are not just believed,
they are lived.
Now, while body futurism captivates the
tech elite, body stuff has overtaken pop
culture in general. Huberman is the
biggest podcaster in the nation. Seed
oil discourse has created a new phys
physical purity drive. One in eight
Americans have tried GLP1s and building
on the immense popularity of Vander
Coke's the body keeps the score, trauma
release, and somatic experiencing are
squarely in the Overton window. The
concerns of everyday Americans have also
turned to the embodied self.
Numerous factors paved the way for this
embodied turn in mainstream culture. The
reaction against inshitified social
media spaces is one. The bounce back
from co era work from home policies is
another. And lifestyle brand burnout is
a third crucial factor.
Three years ago in my essay life after
lifestyle, I wrote that conscious
consumerism as a substitute for
legitimacy or for legitimate community
was bound to fail. I said we're going
from direct to consumer brands to direct
to consumer practices. Well, everything
is now some kind of run club, surf club,
lifting club, walking club, hiking club,
chess club, sonnet club. And I hope
you're happy.
Anything that captures the popular
imagination today, whether scientific or
spiritual, unfailingly draws from the
realm of embodied practice.
Now, the vast adoption of kinesthetic
media in so uh in Tik Tok and reals made
this newfound focus on the body a
permanent societal shift.
What the Tik Tok media format does is
turn body practices into remixable,
forkable content. On Tik Tok, people
aren't just doing therapy. They're
breathing. They're tapping. They're
stretching to release trauma. A Tik Tok
trend is a social embodied algorithm
that can be adopted by others. In other
words, a protocol.
If anything exemplifies the shift from
software to the body, it is this word
protocol which has migrated from
describing technical standards to
signifying body practices.
The new health protocols for diet,
bodybuilding and supplementation are the
modernist architecture of body futurism.
Weight Watchers, arguably the ancestor
of these protocols, already had
incorporated rigorous self-serveillance
and social participation. Today's
protocols function similarly but
automate data collection via wearables
and adding competitive social features
like the sleep score.
In as much as protocols are tightly
scripted scopes of action, they are also
participatory institutions that connect
bodies through regulation.
You've heard of protocols, but you need
to understand protocolism.
the format of social control suited to a
world enchanted by body futurism
requiring constant self-monitoring and
self-regulation.
Therefore, there is a dual destiny that
I foresee for this embodied turn.
Down one path lie body-based
technocratic control schemes, astrourfed
protocols of self-regimentation.
Down the other lies true freedom through
body awareness.
New understandings of the personal body
always lead to new understandings of the
social body and vice versa.
The medieval body politic was based on
an anatomy of limbs, the head, the torso
and the feet, symbolically justifying
the political hierarchy of kings,
nobles, and peasantry.
Today's embodied ideologies and sciences
likewise foreshadow its politics and its
political bodies. To make one example,
the political dimensions of the embodied
turn is blatantly visible in the current
vogue for the pathological.
Body politics is the politics of a
society convinced of its own sickness.
And this era is characterized by
resentment that finds expression in
various embodied maladies. the
loneliness epidemic, the toxic food
system, hormonal dysregulation, the
microplastics, the neurotic obsession
with declining sperm counts, declining
sex rates, declining everything.
All of this sickness contributes to an
atmosphere of political decline and the
prevailing sense that America or even
Western civilization itself is ending.
Disability is not just a metaphorical
matter here because public
administration has gone defunct in
reality as the embarrassing mishandling
of CO revealed.
Traditional political practice is
impotent and new institutions never
arose.
Now some who preach the decline of the
west have latched on to historian Oswald
Spangler.
According to Spangler, a culture in its
old age becomes a civilization like
ours. Rational, rigid, bureaucratized,
petrified, managerial, despiritualized.
An aging body breaks down and
decomposes.
But things grow from rot.
The demise of our political and social
organisms
is a necessary prelude to societal
renewal.
And that is the greatest potential of
body futurism, of all this sematic
experiencing. It's a return to the body
as the basic political unit, the raw
material of nerve and flesh, the
foundation for new forms of communion.
Not neoliberal atomization,
but a literal decomposition of our tired
political bodies, our geriatric
institutional bodies, our abstracted
social media bodies.
a decomposition back into firm,
energetic, sensual, individual bodies.
Spinosa saw this when he said, "We do
not even know what a body can do."
Bodies are the foundation of what is
real and of relationships to one
another.
At the core of every social form, every
form of art, architecture, politics, and
music, every runclub and dinner party is
an arrangement of bodies.
If institutions can no longer be relied
on, we can only turn to local forms of
self-sufficiency, that is mutual
relations between bodies. Whatever we
call a culture is simply the local style
of bringing bodies into relation.
Spinosa insisted that ethics derives
from the interactions of bodies
themselves. He said the good is when a
body directly compounds its relation
with ours and with all or part of its
power increases ours.
The bad is when a body combines with our
parts in ways that do not correspond to
our essence as when a poison breaks down
the blood.
The relevance of Spinosa now is that
political freedom requires a liberation
of the body.
For when we return to the body, when we
return to sheer sensation,
it is possible to find what brings us
joy, what compounds our power and
assists us in becoming more free.
And this freedom, this joy, this power
is not to be found in solitude, but in
the joining of bodies.
Bodies moving in space, sensing each
other, touching, exploring from first
principles. What is actually good for
this body? What social forms heal me,
repair me?
These sensations
are the source of cultural renewal.
And this is a different use of the body
than the homogenizing protocols and
futurisms of self-chosen control.
It is attunement to the microcosmos of
felt experience.
A phenomenological intuition
that is the physical coralate of what's
called wisdom.
Capacities for resolving disputes in
satisfying ways. Handling conflict with
grace, holding integrity in challenging
moments. All these kinds of wisdom are a
physiological sensitivity.
And the greatest potential of body
futurism is just this, an enlightenment
of the body.
A new politics based on the
possibilities of the enlightened body is
on the brink of eruption. Now
the enlightened body asks what
arrangements of bodies, what patterns of
interaction, what social architectures
stoke within us a shared vitality.
These questions point to enlightened
social architectures grounded in the
wisdom of the body. The architectural
theories of Christopher Alexander,
restorative justice procedures, even
ecstatic dance. These are embodied
languages of relationship and community
that emerge from shared sematic
experience. Call them sematic forms, the
physical and cultural structures that
shape how bodies come together and
interact.
Now, a word to the wise.
The bodies that can create these new
sematic forms are not the battling,
emotionalized, vibrating, explosive
bodies exalted by the Italian futurists.
They are not the heroic, athletic,
enthusiastic, homogeneous bodies
introduced by German national socialism.
Those are the bodily programs of fascism
which failed not just militarily and
morally but even productively producing
only a dead end.
These bodies are the warm and sweating
bodies,
the liquidly sobbing bodies,
the bodies of lovers. bodies with
bruised feet planted half in the earth.
Turbulent, fleshy, sensual, eating,
drinking, and breeding bodies, black
limbmed and white-limmed bodies at home
on the range. Bodies at home on the
pounding asphalt. Bodies, bodies of
every human cast, bodies of every rank
and religion. These are the democratic
bodies. These are the new American
bodies.
That is why you,
you and your bodies,
the very thighs you're sitting on,
the very lungs you're breathing with,
the eyes you're seeing with, the hand
you're gripping with. You and your body
are the material and the resource at
stake in this embodied turn.
You have to sensitize yourself to joyous
affect.
You have to avoid the awful passions of
hatred and remorse.
Rather than making ideological questions
into proxy battlefields for our embodied
relational desires, you have to learn
how to build community out of your
experience.
To enlighten the body
is to immerse in practices that
sensitize our physical perception to
these relations.
Whether focusing or sematic experiencing
or hakcomi or conscious sexuality or
contact improv or soundbathing or hot
and cold exposure, not a wellness, not
as self-care, but experiential learning.
Spinosa saw joyous relations between
bodies as the foundation of the good.
Christ taught universal love between
men.
It is only in a society based on
harmonious relations between and among
people and from the working out of
harmonious body politics into more
elaborate forms that new social bodies
can grow.
So to be a body futurist, you have to be
a body. First and foremost,
you must become intimately aware of the
most basic phenomenological sensations.
You have to know
what is the sense I get from the air
around me right now.
What is it like to be near who I'm
sitting near?
Can I feel their presence right now?
What is my experience of this space,
this architecture,
this social scene?
Was this interaction successful?
Did I feel connected?
Does this interaction make me feel
nourished or enriched?
Or do I feel blocked,
stupified, or dominated in some way?
And what role did I have in how this
interaction played out?
Did I carry myself at arms length, with
distance,
or with openness, with a yes in my
heart,
with love?
Spendler wrote the decline of the west.
But I believe America is not the west
but something new.
The decomposition of our institutions
into mere bodily acts and back again is
the natural cycle of death and rebirth.
And it is time to let the old die.
The corpse of an imminent god is the
placenta of a new cosmology.
There is nothing more important to the
renewal of culture than the
enlightenment of the body itself. The
development of a new folk phenomenology,
the mysticism and eroticism of the
sematic in all its varieties and forms.
The cultivation of deep phenomenological
insight is the foundation of a new idea
of what life can be.
This idea is very nent.
But if you sit here,
listen closely,
settle in,
feel your forehead, the bridge of the
nose, your breathing chest.
If you listen to your heart as it beats
to you. If you hear what it whispers
when you sit, when you stand,
when you leave this place, when you meet
another's gaze,
you can feel it as through the gauze of
a veil.